













Syriana Ethical Analysis
Amanda Smith & Connor Lowdermilk
Colorado Mesa University



Who were the stakeholders for each major ethical choice made in the film? 
        ◦ The merger of two US oil companies Connex and Killen becoming Connex-Killen affecting 37,000 workers in 160 countries. All those workers including their families and any other person with stock or interest in the new developed company. 
        ◦ Bennett Holiday created tension between the Texas oilman, Killen, Connex, and U.S. Attorney Donald Farish. His choice to sell out Dalton from Killen impacted the entire company as it’s ethics were questioned.
        ◦ Bob Barnes ethical decision to go to the middle east has a very large impact on his son and his family. It also leaves the US government as a stakeholder because of the decisions he makes while there
        ◦ Bryan Woodman, the American energy analyst  and his family were impacted by his choice to become Prince Nasir’s economic adviser. His decision to accept Nasir’s $75 million led to anger between him and his wife.
        ◦ Looking at a bigger picture, the world was impacted by the fluctuations in oil prices that probably came after this ordeal. The instability to the crown would reflect poorly on the market.  Also the attack on the Connex-Killen oil plant had stakeholders that were affected included the workers that died, had to clean and repair the place, and their respective families.
 For each major character, please describe how they complied with or violated ethical principles, and illustrate how the outcome would have changed had they acted differently. 
        ◦ Bob Barnes (George Clooney) was sent to the middle east to assassinate after  career backfired when he made his superiors uncomfortable with his memos and in his interview for a promotion. He was possibly one of the most ethical characters in this movie due to his choice and attempts at finding the missing missile. If the government would have allowed him to continue his search for it, the Connex-Killen tanker explosion could have been prevented, and the Pakistani migrant workers could still be alive. When he learns that the people who are investigating him as well as initiating the American backed assassination of Prince Nasir are in fact the CLI, he returns to the middle east in order to try and save him. Despite this action not changing the outcome of the prince’s death, it was still noble.
        ◦ Prince Nasir (Alexander Siddig), is dedicated the reform of his country for ideas like gender equality and energy use, and wants to use the oil profits from the country to diversify the economy. Thanks to Byran Woodman, he understands that the oil industry is not economically sustainable and wishes to preserve the greatness of his country. When he is not named successor, he attempts a coo. This is the main point of change for Prince Nasir – if he supported his younger brother and attempted his coo differently, or attempted change from his new position, he would have still been alive.
        ◦ Bryan Woodman (Matt Damon), An energy analyst with young children who is given the opportunity to become Prince Nasir’s economic adviser with an offer that comes after his child dies at the prince’s party. His choice to move to the middle east to do so puts him at odds with his family, and if he had chosen differently, he could have lived a less dangerous life in the states.
        ◦ Bennet Holiday starts off attempting to find the wrongdoings of Connex-Killen  and is ethical, but is ultimately dragged into their mess. When he presents evidence of the transfer of funds, Connex-Killen acts like they didn’t know anything, even when threatened. In the end, the merger still goes through, and the under the table deals still stand, Holiday unable to do much of anything. If he would have prevented a stronger case without faltering, he would have been able to halt the merger.
 Analyze the actions of any major character in the movie. 
        ◦ Bob Barnes (George Clooney), Agrees to go through with the assassination and then gets caught and tortured. He makes the decision not to give up any information but rather take the beating and potential death. He is only saved when someone stopped his torturer by said Said knows what he is doing and it is not welcome.
        ◦ Pakistani migrant workers Saleem Ahmed Khan and Wasim began the movie as workers for the Connex refiner, but are laid off at the start of the movie. Their choice to continue searching for work and learn Arabic led them to meet the charismatic and radical cleric that led them to attack the Connex-Killen tanker. Thanks to the US’s governments lack of intervention on searching for the missing missile, it’s very easy for them to execute this attack. They allow themselves to be convinced and take their own lives after watching several others before them do the same.
        ◦ Bryan Woodman (Matt Damon), Decided to meet with the emperor but was turned down and met with his associates about the price of oil and natural gas through his firm. This put his family in stakeholder positions because he took them on the trip to Spain with him and after an accident in a pool left his son to pay the highest price. Meets for his firm in order to get more money, gives his partner an idea to double his profit, although may seem like a good idea, causing more trouble and getting himself further into the issue.
 
 The plots of most films turn on one or more ethical choices, which must be made by the characters in the movie. Tell us what ethical decisions altered the plot of the movie.   
        ◦  The first tying choice that connects the Wasim story line to Bob Barnes assassination story line is the choice the CIA made to stop searching for the missing missile. This led to Barnes’ frustration during his interview with the CLI/CIA where he spoke his mind and made his superiors uncomfortable. He chose to not hide the truth, as his boss told him “Nothing is wrong in Iran, everything is fine”, knowing that everything was not alright. He chose to not going along with the CIA’s scheme to cover up the Iranian incidents and it landed him in trouble. It also allowed Wasim to get ahold of the missile that he used to take his and many other’s lives.
        ◦ Bryan Woodman’s choice to accept the money that Nasir offered him for his children altered Nasir’s life. It allowed to him to follow his dreams in reforming his country, and led him at odds against his brother. It altered the plot because he suddenly became a large target for the CLI who had extremely close ties with the CIA who ordered his death. Bryan was very nearly killed in the crossfire, and had significant damage to his family’s emotional ties.
        ◦ Holiday’s choice to ultimately give the DOJ information about the illegal information he had discovered and the secondly his choice to give up the under the table deal Hewitt made while the deal was processing led the merger to be allowed. 
